the good news do I have a mic gap the
good news is that after me it's lunch so
I'm the end of unit now I'm a professor
I've been at this game for a long time
so I know a tired audience when I see
one it's been a long morning and a lot
of wonderful ideas so I'd like to take
real quick everybody stand up just stand
up and stretch your arms up bringing
that more good energy bring it in okay
okay now sit down
if the most important philosophical
question one can ask in life is do we
survive the death of our body which dr.
van Lommel is asking I think the second
most important question is do we live
once or do we live more than once and it
all hinges on time the problem the
significance is of time as a teacher if
I give a quiz I have a right to expect a
certain performance from the students if
I give an hour exam I have a right to
expect a higher level of performance and
if I give a take-home research paper I
expect a higher level of performance
because they have more time if this
universe at this magnificent universe
that we are in has a purpose
Venessa philosopher we can we have to
measure the purpose of the universe
proportionate to the time we have to
fulfill that purpose if we only live one
time then we might extrapolate or
estimate or calculate the purpose of
existence to be but if we live a hundred
times if we live a thousand times if we
live 10,000 times if our participation
in this magnificent universe is truly
open-ended then we have a very different
relationship with the universe and then
we have a reason to think about the
possible purpose of existence in a
completely different framework and the
religions of the last four thousand
years have had a tendency to not value
physical existence they've had a
tendency to say where you achieve
realization you achieve enlightenment
and then you leave nirvana some sorry
you escape samsara moksha escape or you
achieve salvation and then you leave but
that leaves the fundamental question
what is the purpose of the universe
unanswered what is the purpose of my
physical existence in the universe but
if we come back if we come back to this
life many times
then we have a different story that
begins to unfold and it doesn't I think
it I think our understanding of
reincarnation is completely incomplete
at this point just as we've begun to
understand the true depth and breadth of
the universe that we are part of
likewise when we begin to understand
that we participate we're dancing with
this universe for extended period of
time then we have a deeper understanding
of what the universe might actually be
trying to accomplish in us and what
might be our gift to the universe in the
continual refinement and compounding of
our talent over time so what I'd like to
do today is talk about the evidence for
reincarnation and I've been thinking
about this and been in this game for a
long time the first book I wrote it was
is life cycles and notice how long ago I
wrote it it was the first book I wrote
as an academic and that is a signal of
how important I think this topic is and
that there is good critical empirical
evidence that allows us to decide this
topic if there weren't critical evidence
then it would just be a wasted exercise
and I think this evidence did not exist
50 years ago and the theologians used to
debate about reincarnation go round and
round but today we have a different body
of physical of empirical evidence on
reincarnation that has moved the topic
from the theologians table to the
psychologists table to the philosophers
table to the to the psychiatrist table
and that's what I'd like to take you
through some today now when looking at
the evidence for reincarnation we can
either look at go small or go large we
either look at the detailed cases in or
we look at the larger body of literature
the beauty and the real joy is in the
detailed cases but in 45 minutes I've
chosen to go large what I would really
like to do is encourage you today to
read one book on reincarnation that you
haven't read
yeah and so I want to take you into some
of the literature on reincarnation and
show you some of the patterns that are
emerging in the literature and rebirth
okay ready to go let's go 20 cases
suggestive of reincarnation by Ian
Stevenson this is a book that changed my
life because like many people when I
finished graduate school in 1978 I was
an atheistic Lee inclined agnostic I was
trained in philosophy of religion but
all that training basically made me an
atheist but when I encountered this book
right after finishing graduate school
you turned my life around because he
convinced me that there was evidence
that we live on life more than once he
is the okay okay Stephen Stevenson is
the Carlson professor was a Carlson
professor from the University of
Virginia between 1967 and 2001 he has
written 11 books on reincarnation some
of the most important are these cases of
reincarnation type written over a
seven-year period from 73 to 84
unlearned language languages by children
about children who have an ability to
speak a language which no one in their
family speaks no one in their entire
town speaks sometimes an ancient
language children who remember previous
lives and his last book his monument as
a 1000-page two-volume work a study of a
hundred and eighty-seven cases of
children who not only have detailed
memories of their most previous of their
mediate life but actually carry the
scars in their body which relate to the
death wounds of the body in their
previous personality and that of course
really upsets academics I mean it's one
thing to have continuity of memory
that's
enough but to suggest that a wound of
death can actually be transferred into
the physical body of a subsequent
personality that drives my colleagues
right up a wall but 187 cases
well-documented case histories it's a
magnificent book what are we looking at
with Stevenson we're looking at cases of
children from around the world who have
detailed recall of their most immediate
recent life they know their way around
towns that they've never been in before
they can recognize persons when they're
brought into the life place of the
previous personality they can recognize
persons that they have never met before
they know the personal history their
personal history with that person they
had the appropriate emotional responses
with that person husband's four wives
children you have cases of a
five-year-old child who is showing all
the feelings of the husband of a 35 year
old woman with all the emotional
responses there is one case of a child
called parmitt when he was reunited with
the family of the previous personality
he was very shy around the wife of the
previous personality he wouldn't
identify her until she left the room but
then he identified her and then later he
took her aside and he said two things to
her he said I've come but you have not
fixed bindi which is the spot that
Indian women wear on therefore it is an
indication that they're married and he
also criticized her for wearing a white
sari instead of a colourful sari and the
tradition in India is when you become a
widow
you don't wear color from the rest of
your life your wear only white
essentially this five year old boy was
saying to this 35 year old woman I've
come but you're acting like what you're
not married they know the inner
architecture of homes that they've never
been in they know people who owed them
money when they died and the debt had
not been collected in one case this
little child was brought back to the
home
of the previous personality and the wife
of the previous personality said okay if
you're my husband where did you put the
will we couldn't find the will
the little boy walked over to a
floorboard in the kitchen pulled up the
floorboard and pulled the will out of
this little secret place that only he
knew about in the floor of the kitchen
cases like that drive my philosophical
colleagues at the University right up a
wall they don't know what to do with it
it's hard for them deny it but there it
is some patterns in the data the average
time interval between the death of the
first personality and the birth of the
second personality Stevens finds about
two and a half years the average
distance between the life place of the
first personality and the life place of
the second personality 50 miles and
these children tend to lose their
memories around the year around 8 years
old when they begun begins to get into
school and in a more complex social
environment they basically forget they
lose their memory so we're looking at a
small time window from research from
about three years old to eight years old
a five-minute time window to get to
these children and document their
memories the remaining 90% forget them
by the time they're 8 the remaining 10%
the vast majority of those forget them
when they hit puberty when they hit
puberty you know all hell breaks loose
and they forget their subtle traces of
their former lives Stevenson asked why
do these children remember what most of
us forget and his answer is he doesn't
know we need more research it's all
research he has a hypothesis he points
out that about 60% of these children
died violently in their previous life
the remaining 40% died either early
suddenly or with an acute sense of
unfinished business like a mother who
dies shortly
after the birth of her baby his
hypothesis is maybe there's something
about the trauma of being wrenched from
life violently suddenly with an acute
sense of unfinished business that
encodes the the consciousness in a way
that draws them back faster than usual
and closer than usual because this time
I don't have time to give all the
evidence but this two-and-a-half and 50
month two and a half years 50 miles is
faster than the population at large and
closer to home than the population at
large in reviewing 20 cases suggestive
of reincarnation the Journal of American
Medical Association wrote Stevenson has
painstakingly and unemotionally
collected a detailed series of cases in
which the evidence for reincarnation is
difficult to understand on other grounds
two years later the Journal of nervous
and mental disease a major psychiatric
journal in the United States published
an entire journal devoted to Stevenson's
cases and it was such an unusual move
that they published an editorial to
justify or to explain their rationale
and in the editorial they wrote our
decision to publish this material
recognizes the legitimacy of his
research methods and the conformity of
his reasoning to the usual canons of
rational thought that's the way an
academic qualifies their endorsement now
the philosophical institution the
guardians of Orthodoxy are not going to
let stevenson get away with this not
without a fight
and he has had his critics and the most
important critic is a man named Paul
Edwards and I promise you this is the
best picture I could find of Paul
Edwards online his book reincarnation
with critical examination Paul Edwards
was anime jure American philosopher he
taught at the New School for Social
Research his best men
for having been the editor-in-chief of
the eight vol encyclopedia of philosophy
so he's a major heavyweight in the
philosophical tradition he wrote a
series of articles in 1986 to 87 a four
part article on reincarnation and
eventually he published these articles
in a later form in this book
reincarnation and his he is the harshest
critic of Stevenson he accuses Stevenson
of fraud he accuses Stevenson of not
being sufficiently rigorous in his
analysis of the data he uses Reese T
Vinson of not actually verifying that he
thinks that there could have been
contact between the two families that
Stevenson isn't really critical in
proving that these families the first
and second personality have never had
contact but there's actually a deeper
you know to accuse someone of bad
research and to prove bad research to
different things and if you go through
Stevenson's
arguments very carefully I'm sorry
Edwards arguments very carefully you see
that there's kind of a deeper logic
operating in his work he says
reincarnation would represent a
crucifixion of our understanding and by
our understanding he means secular
humanism the philosophical scientific
tradition the Newtonian Cartesian
philosophical tradition he says if you
believe in reincarnation you must accept
what he calls six collateral assumptions
and these collateral assumptions are
that materialism is false that that mind
is not reducible to brain that our
identity is more than our personality
that there is a domain other than
space-time that death is an illusion
that there may be a deeper logic to our
lives
edward says these assumptions are surely
fantastic if not indeed nonsense and
even in the absence of a demonstration
of specific flaws a rational person will
conclude either that Stevenson's reports
are seriously defective or that his
alleged facts can be explained without
bringing in reincarnation
well I won't go over Edwards arguments
more carefully because Robert Robert
almoner has done this for us
Robert a murder is another major
American philosopher he is professor
emeritus at Georgia State University he
is authored or co-authored 24 books he
wrote this book in which he is
evaluating five categories of evidence
for survival of death in the major
analysis he's doing in this book is the
debate between Stevenson and Edwards and
what he shows by analyzing Edwards
argument is that Edwards does not refute
Stevenson's argument what he does is
refuse to even look at it seriously
because he is so convinced that it must
be false he says that his argument
constitutes a blatant bit of question
begging because he always assumes
precisely what is in contention what is
in contention is can consciousness exist
without a brain and because he believes
that science has proven that
consciousness can exist without a brain
therefore we know that there must be
something wrong with the evidence our
mirror says if you have a very
commanding argument that you can't that
you cannot refute then not to accept the
argument is to act irrationally
Stephenson's tradition continues even
though he's passed on he's now looking
from the bleacher seats watching us him
there this book by Tom Schroeder old
Souls
Tom Schroeder wins the definitely wins
for having the award for having the
worst cover of any book in reincarnation
research but Tom Schroeder is an
interesting guy he's a reporter he's a
Pulitzer Prize winning reporter he's
also one of the editors for the
Washington Post a major American
newspaper and he was interested in
whether Stevenson's research could stand
up to a critical reporters eye so he
went with Stevenson on one of his trips
around the world studying these small
children he looked over his shoulder and
he came away convinced as the subtitle
shows compelling evidence from children
who remember past lives convinced that
this Stevenson's methods were good the
data would stand up these children were
real this is a compelling case for
reincarnation and at the University of
Virginia Stevens's work continues in the
person of Jim Tucker who has now
inherited Stevenson's chair this book is
a wonderful book this is very much in
the Stevenson tradition continuing to
look in detail the detail cases and
explaining why these cases cannot be
attributed to weaker hypotheses like
super SCI or something like this I might
mention that Jim Tucker's book is a lot
easier to read than Stevenson's book
Stevenson writes and things like a
lawyer it's very good but it's very very
detailed very dry
Jim Tucker brings a little more life to
the subject matter now everything we've
been looking at so far has to do with
what I would call the evidence from
spontaneous memories just children who
spontaneously have memories of previous
life but there's another body of
evidence that you have to approach it
with the different framework it's evoked
memories
memories which have been evoked in some
way different techniques even massage
can evoke a former life memory for the
most common one that we're familiar with
is hypnotherapy some type of hypnosis
the following case is following books by
our representative titles of people who
have worked in the field of past life
therapy my favorite book written by a
single therapist who has worked in the
area of past life therapy and has
thought about it a great deal is this
book by Roger will notice a date an
earlier book other lives other cells
started us a union ended up in past life
therapy doing past life's work
even though Carl Jung I don't know
whether you you probably know he himself
believed in reincarnation towards the
latter years of his life but he kind of
kept it quiet this is a wonderful book
intellectually totally competent a
wonderful review of detailed cases and a
discussion of the implications of these
cases past life therapy began to really
explode in the 70s 80s and there were a
lot of therapists who were concerned
that there was not a graduate school
there was no curriculum there was no
agreed-upon curriculum for how to
establish the credentials for people who
wanted to do past life therapy and this
task was taken on by Winifred Lukas who
wrote a magnificent two volume anthology
which is a compendium of essays and
articles of the best of the best of the
people working at that time in past life
there so if you wanted to read a single
book I would read boogers book by one
author but if you wanted to see an
overview of multiple people writing in
the field I would do order Winifred
Lucas's book regression therapy a
handbook for professionals
Carol Bowman was a social worker she
wasn't interested in past life therapy
she got into it because her son started
having nightmares
he started waking up with very
disturbing nightmares and she approached
him she tried to work with him took him
to therapists tried to do conventional
things but it didn't work and then she
began to do her homework she began to
look into past life therapy should be
able to learn in the field and she began
to help her own child solve his own
trauma carried over from a previous life
that was both spontaneously bubbling up
in his life she began to attract other
people with other children who were also
having problems and eventually she wrote
this beautiful book specifically a
therapeutic book for parents who have
children who are having traumatic
memories surface that they're having
difficulty dealing with it was very
successful very persuasive it really
made she had a lot of impact she got
more business coming in she wrote a
second book she gets the award for the
second worst title a cover on
reincarnation book returned from heaven
she's looking specifically at relatives
who have been reincarnated within their
own families now that's a philosopher
that's a weaker body of evidence right
because there's so much potential for
contamination if you're remembering your
grandfather but as a father this is
interesting it's interesting because
reincarnation simply doesn't happen
where it's works well for the
researchers across great distances and
great families but inside families is a
very common occurrence and therefore it
deserves to be looked at
and next michael newton two wonderful
books and i must confess a special
partiality if you want to read some if
you wanted to just pick out one or two
books out of this entire list i can't
help but wish that you would read
michael Newton's work Michael Newton was
a hypnotherapist who got into past life
therapy and who was doing past life
therapy and then he accidentally
discovered that his clients in deep
hypnosis had the ability not only to
remember their previous life but to
remember what happened to them after
they died they could remember basically
his clients were beginning to describe
the afterlife and he thought he didn't
think this was possible but he followed
his clients a good therapist that he is
and he took hundreds of people into deep
hypnotic regressions and he followed
them when they would go through their
former life and they would go through
the death experience he would follow
them into their memories continuing on
and then he would ask them questions and
he kept detailed notes he would ask
questions about what was this what was
going on what was it like and what he
found was regardless of what background
people came from whatever their cultural
and culturation was fundamentalist
Baptist Karl Marxist atheist hardcore
scientific reductionist whatever their
background was people were describing
the same fundamental reality in the
after death state they were describing a
world that had order that had structure
that had logic there was actually a
social structure it was a world in which
older learners taught younger learners
and it was also a world where people
made the choice to reincarnate as a
conscious careful decision it's one of
the most important choices you make if
you go to college what courses you sign
up for that's an important choice
because once you sign up for a course
you're committed for the entire semester
when you incarnate what life you take on
is an important choice and Michael
Newton found that in fact in the
spiritual world the choice of what life
to take is a consciously and taken
choice made under the guidance of your
spiritual helpers and made in
cooperation with the other persons that
you're going to be incarnated with so
before we knew before we were born when
we knew more than we know now
when we were aware of more than we are
aware now we chose the life that we are
living now that fact alone just bears
deep meditation two last examples not
from professionals they're from amateurs
but that's what makes them interesting
the first is this book looking for Carol
Beckwith and what makes it interesting
is the man who wrote it
Robert snow because Robert snow is the
commander of the homicide division of
the Indianapolis police department all
right so he's chief of detectives of he
investigates murders his opinion is very
important it must stand up in court he
would be the last person that you would
think would be doing research on a
former life but it happened that he kind
of he did a hypno hypnotic session not
oriented towards past lives he just kind
of on a lark he did the hypnotic session
and in this hypnotic session he was hit
in the face with a life that appeared to
be his life but it was manured him to
death and he literally ran out of the
room but he was curious and so he
brought all of his detective skills to
the systemic search to see if he could
identify and track down whether there
was such a person and the story of his
experience and the story of his
detective work is told in this short
book looking for Carol Beckwith and
lastly
this book Soul Survivor which you may
have seen it because they did some news
clips decent news clips on it written by
Bruce and and realigning about their son
James and this is a case of a child
three years old two years old who
started having spontaneous memories and
trauma waking up crying in the middle of
the night
spontaneous memories of a Pierre
apparently dying in World War two as an
airplane pilot
over the coast of Japan and his father
was a fundamentalist Baptist and he was
absolutely vehement Lee opposed to his
son reincarnating mother was a little
more receptive
so they got involved in first they
wanted to help their son but he got
involved in the the inquiry because he
wanted to disprove reincarnation
whatever was going on with James he
to protect his faith in the end they
tracked down this pilot they tracked
down this story they were able to
reunite James with the people at a
military reunion with the people who had
served with this pilot and James was
able to identify people out of this
group the father became convinced that
in fact his son was a reincarnation of
this pilot and reincarnation is true
now I'd like to just finish with two two
observations quick observations as lunch
awaits I'd like to emphasize what we
don't know about reincarnation the
evidence for reincarnation may be
compelling however we don't really know
a lot about how reincarnation takes
place or what the physics of rebirth is
we're still beginners in this at this
point we can't say what the soul is or
what it's made of how does it come and
go from the physical body how does it
interface with our biology and our
genetic makeup how does it encode its
previous learning into our present body
and how does it leave with its learning
intact after we die these things right
now are beyond our present grasp I'm
sure we'll make progress in the future
but before we do we're going to have to
start we're going to have to stop
reducing mind to brain and we're going
to be have to approach this research
with a more multi-dimensional
metaphysical cosmology and lastly I'd
like to point to a certain paradox in
the evidence and to do this paradox I
need to go really go back to Ian
Stevenson Stevenson's evidence I think
is the most powerful evidence for
reincarnation and his evidence liberate
SAR thinking at one level but it also
constricts our thinking at another
because the the strongest evidence for
reincarnation comes from lives that show
the tightest connection the tightest
correlation but the correlation can be
so tight it can lead if you just study
Stevenson's evidence it can lead to a
anemic an under developed vision of what
life is like when we die when most of us
died in that respect we must remember
that Stevenson's cases are not typical
cases these children are coming back
very fast and very close to home most
people spend much
more quote time in the timeless
condition of the spirit world they they
have a much wider breadth of experiences
so
Stephenson's evidence liberate sus to
thinking about the soul and thinking
about our lives and thinking about our
existence in a much larger expanded
framework but in order to actually fill
in that canvas in order to actually
explore more deeply what happens to us
when we die and what the larger circle
of life is like from expanded
consciousness to contracted
consciousness and back into expanded
consciousness we need to look at other
bodies of data I think Michael Newton's
work is an important body of data that
gives us a larger vision in this
afternoon when I talk about psychedelic
research I'll look at another body of
data which I think can give us an
expanded vision of our life in this
universe thank you very much
[Applause]
again Chris again thank you so much this
was again a real experience to listen to
you and I so much like how you how you
make clear that this is the knowledge
which makes really such a difference how
we live our life which makes such a
difference how we approach every minute
in our life if this is true or not makes
a really difference
like I think all the three speakers of
this session fit together so well
it's I think it's so much arranged and
it's really the core of the Institute
for existential consciousness because
this are the real existential questions
and there is a scientific basis and we
have to bring it to society to make a
shift in consciousness again so thank
you very much and I'm so much looking
forward to your next lecture
you